## Understanding Morphosyntactic Representations in Pretrained Language Models

Pretrained Language Models (PLMs) have revolutionized NLP, but their linguistic underpinnings still raise several questions. This thesis tries to shed some light on these questions by investigating PLMs' ability to encode morphosyntactic information, focusing on tense and subject-verb agreement.

A novel probing method that leverages neural probes is developed to test the representations generated by three PLM architectures: BERT, RoBERTa, and Sentence Transformer. These PLMs are tested across three morphologically diverse languages: English, Italian, and German.

This repository hosts the code, [data](/datasets/) and [results](/results/) of my Master's thesis. For a more in-depth explanation of the research questions, data, methodology and findings, please refer to the [thesis report](MA_Thesis.pdf).

## Requirements

This project uses Poetry, a dependency management and packaging tool for Python. To install Poetry, follow the steps described at https://python-poetry.org/docs/#installation. Additionally, depending on you GPU, you may need to adjust the following line in `pyprject.toml` to get the appropriate `torch` version for your setup:

```toml
torch = {file = "./torch-2.0.0+rocm5.4.2-cp310-cp310-linux_x86_64.whl"}
```

After installing Poetry and updating `pyprject.toml`, you can install the required dependencies and create a dedicated environment by running:

```shell
poetry install
```

## Run the Experiments

The details for the tense and agreement experiments in each language are outlined in the respective `json` files:

- `it_experiments.json` for Italian
- `en_experiments.json` for English
- `de_experiments.json` for German

To run the experiments for a specific language, execute the following command:

```shell
python main.py [language_code]_experiments.json
```

Replace [language_code] with the desired language code (e.g., it, en, or de). This will execute `main.py` with the specified `json` file containing the experiment's configuration and data.
